= OAuth2::Provider

This gem provides a toolkit for adding OAuth2 provider capabilities to a Ruby
web app. It handles most of the protocol for you: it is designed to provide
a sufficient level of abstraction that it can implement updates to the protocol
without affecting your application code at all. All you have to deal with is
authenticating your users and letting them grant access to client apps.

It is also designed to be usable within any web frontend, at least those of
Rails and Sinatra. It assumes very little about the request objects in your
environment, namely they:

* respond to <tt>#params</tt> with a <tt>Hash</tt> of request parameters
* respond to <tt>#get?</tt> and <tt>#post?</tt>
* respond to <tt>#url</tt> with the full URL string of the request
* respond to <tt>#env</tt>, returning the HTTP environment <tt>Hash</tt>

It stores the clients and authorizations using ActiveRecord; the schema is in
<tt>lib/oauth2/model/schema.rb</tt>. Run it to update your database to
store OAuth data:

  OAuth2::Model::Schema.up

The current imeplementation is based on draft-10[http://tools.ietf.org/html/draft-ietf-oauth-v2-10].


== Usage

A basic example is in <tt>example/application.rb</tt>. To implement OAuth, you
need to provide four things:

* Some UI to register client applications
* The OAuth request endpoint
* A flow for logged-in users to grant access to clients
* Resources protected by access tokens


=== Configuration

<tt>OAuth2::Provider</tt> requires very little configuration. The only thing it
needs to know about your app is its name, which is used in the headers for some
authentication errors. To load the library, just do this:

  require 'oauth2/provider'
  OAuth2::Provider.realm = 'My OAuth app'

You may also need to configure assertion handlers if your application supports
third-party access credentials. See 'Using Assertions' below.


=== Registering client applications

Clients are modelled by the <tt>OAuth2::Model::Client</tt> class, which is an
ActiveRecord model. You just need to implement a UI for creating them, for
example in a Sinatra app:

  get '/oauth/apps/new' do
    @client = OAuth2::Model::Client.new
    erb :new_client
  end

  post '/oauth/apps' do
    @client = OAuth2::Model::Client.new(params)
    @client.save ? erb(:show_client) : erb(:new_client)
  end

Client applications must have a <tt>name</tt> and a <tt>redirect_uri</tt>:
provide fields for editing these but do not allow the other fields to be edited,
since they are the client's access credentials. When you've created the client,
you should show its details to the user registering the client: its <tt>name</tt>,
<tt>redirect_uri</tt>, <tt>client_id</tt> and <tt>client_secret</tt> (the last
two are generated for you). <tt>client_secret</tt> is not stored in plain text
so you can only read it when you initially create the client object.


=== OAuth request endpoint

This is a path that your application exposes in order for clients to communicate
with your application. It is also the page that the client will send users to
so they can authenticate and grant access. Many requests to this endpoint will
be protocol-level requests that do not involve the user, and <tt>OAuth2::Provider</tt>
gives you a generic way to handle all that.

You should use this to get the right response, status code and headers to send to
the client. In the event that <tt>OAuth2::Provider</tt> does not provide a response,
you should render a page that lets the user begin to authenticate and grant access.

This endpoint must be accessible via GET and POST. In this example we will expose
the OAuth service through the path <tt>/oauth/authorize</tt>. We check if there is
a logged-in resource owner and give this to <tt>OAuth::Provider</tt>, since we
may be able to immediately redirect if the user has already authorized the client:

  [:get, :post].each do |method|
    __send__ method, '/oauth/authorize' do
      @owner  = User.find_by_id(session[:user_id])
      @oauth2 = OAuth2::Provider.parse(@owner, request)
      
      redirect @oauth2.redirect_uri if @oauth2.redirect?
          
      headers @oauth2.response_headers
      status  @oauth2.response_status
      
      @oauth2.response_body || erb(:login)
    end
  end

There is a set of parameters that you will need to hold on to for when your app
needs to redirect back to the client. You could store them in the session, or
pass them through forms as the user completes the flow. For example to embed
them in the login form, do this:

  <% @oauth2.params.each do |key, value| %>
    <input type="hidden" name="<%= key %>" value="<%= value %>">
  <% end %>

You may also want to use scopes to provide granular access to your domain using
<i>scopes</i>. The <tt>@oauth2</tt> object exposes the scopes the client has asked
for so you can display them to the user:

  <p>The application <%= @oauth2.client.name %> wants the following permissions:</p>
  
  <ul>
    <% @oauth2.scopes.each do |scope| %>
      <li><%= PERMISSION_UI_STRINGS[scope] %></li>
    <% end %>
  </ul>

You can also use the method <tt>@oauth2.unauthorized_scopes</tt> to get the list
of scopes the user has not already granted to the client, in the case where the
client already has some authorization. If no prior authorization exists between
the user and the client, <tt>@oauth2.unauthorized_scopes</tt> just returns all
the scopes the client has asked for.


=== Granting access to clients

Your application will probably have some concept of a user, or a <i>resource
owner</i> in OAuth lingo. Add this mixin to the model that represents your
users:

  class User < ActiveRecord::Base
    include OAuth2::Model::ResourceOwner
  end

This just adds a couple of relations and methods to the model to let it interact
with the <tt>OAuth2</tt> models.

Once the user has authenticated you should show them a page to let them grant
or deny access to the client application. This is straightforward; let's say
the user checks a box before posting a form to indicate their intent:

  post '/oauth/allow' do
    @user = User.find_by_id(session[:user_id])
    @auth = OAuth2::Provider::Authorization.new(@user, params)
    
    if params['allow'] == '1'
      @auth.grant_access!
    else
      @auth.deny_access!
    end
    redirect @auth.redirect_uri
  end

After granting or denying access, we just redirect back to the client using a
URI that <tt>OAuth2::Provider</tt> will provide for you.


=== Using password credentials

If you like, OAuth lets you use a user's login credentials to authenticate with
a provider. In this case the client application must request these credentials
directly from the user and then post them to the exchange endpoint. On the
provider side you can handle this using the <tt>handle_passwords</tt> and
<tt>grant_access!</tt> API methods, for example:

  OAuth2::Provider.handle_passwords do |client, username, password|
    user = User.find_by_username(username)
    if user.authenticate?(password)
      user.grant_access!(client)
    else
      nil
    end
  end

The block must return <tt>user.grant_access!(client)</tt> if you want to allow
access, otherwise it should return <tt>nil</tt>.


=== Using assertions

Assertions provide a way to access your OAuth services using user credentials
from another service. When using assertions, the user will not authenticate on
your web site; the OAuth client will authenticate the user using some other
framework and obtain a token, then exchange this token for an access token on
your domain.

For example, a client application may let a user authenticate using Facebook,
so the application obtains a Facebook access token from the user. The client
would then pass this token to your OAuth endpoint and exchange it for an
access token from your site. You will typically create an account in your
database to represent this, then have that new account grant access to the
client.

To use assertions, you must tell <tt>OAuth2::Provider</tt> how to handle
assertions based on their type. An assertion type must be a valid URI. For
the Facebook example we'd do the following. The block yields the <tt>Client</tt>
object making the exchange request, and the value of the assertion, which in
this example will be a Facebook access token.

  OAuth2::Provider.handle_assertions 'https://graph.facebook.com/me' do |client, assertion|
    facebook = URI.parse('https://graph.facebook.com/me?access_token=' + assertion)
    response = Net::HTTP.get_response(facebook)
    
    user_data = JSON.parse(response.body)
    account   = User.from_facebook_data(user_data)
    
    account.grant_access!(client)
  end

This code should run when your app boots, not during a request handler - think
of it as configuration for <tt>OAuth2::Provider</tt>. The framework will invoke
it when a client attempts to use assertions with your OAuth endpoint.

The final call in your handler should be to <tt>grant_access!</tt>; this returns
an <tt>Authorization</tt> object that the framework then uses to complete the
response to the client. If you want to deny the request for whatever reason, the
block must return <tt>nil</tt>. If a client tries to use an assertion type you
have no handler for, the client will get an error response.


=== Protecting resources with access tokens

To protect the user's resources you need to check for access tokens. This is
simple, for example a call to get a user's notes:

  get '/user/:username/notes' do
    user  = User.find_by_username(params[:username])
    token = OAuth2::Provider.access_token(user, ['read_notes'], request)
    
    headers token.response_headers
    status  token.response_status
    
    if token.valid?
      JSON.unparse('notes' => user.notes)
    else
      JSON.unparse('error' => 'No notes for you!')
    end
  end

<tt>OAuth2::Provider.access_token()</tt> takes a <tt>ResourceOwner</tt>, a list
of scopes required to access the resource, and a request object. If the token
was not granted for the required scopes, has expired or is simply invalid,
headers and a status code are set to indicate this to the client. <tt>token.valid?</tt>
is the call you should use to determine whether to server the request or not.

It is also common to provide a dynamic resource for getting some basic data
about a user by supplying their access token. This can be done by passing
<tt>nil</tt> as the resource owner:

  get '/me' do
    token = OAuth2::Provider.access_token(nil, [], request)
    if token.valid?
      JSON.unparse('username' => token.owner.username)
    else
      JSON.unparse('error' => 'Keep out!')
    end
  end

<tt>token.owner</tt> returns the <tt>ResourceOwner</tt> that issued the token.
A token represents the fact that a single owner gave a single client a set of
permissions.


=== Transport security

Your application should ensure that any endpoint that receives or returns OAuth
data is only accessible over a secure transport such as the <tt>https:</tt>
protocol. <tt>OAuth2::Provider</tt> can enforces this to make it easier to keep
your users' data secure. If you want to enable these behaviours, set
<tt>OAuth2::Provider.enforce_ssl = true</tt>.

* The <tt>OAuth2::Provider.parse</tt> method will produce error responses and
  will not process the incoming request unless the request was made using the
  <tt>https:</tt> protocol.
* An access token constructed using <tt>OAuth2::Provider.access_token</tt> will
  return <tt>false</tt> for <tt>#valid?</tt> unless the request was made using the
  <tt>https:</tt> protocol.
* Any access token received over an insecure connection is immediately destroyed
  to prevent eavesdroppers getting access to the user's resources. A client
  making an insecure request will have to send the user through the authorization
  process again to get a new token.


== License

Copyright (c) 2010-2011 Songkick.com

Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a copy
of this software and associated documentation files (the "Software"), to deal
in the Software without restriction, including without limitation the rights
to use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, sublicense, and/or sell
copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is
furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions:

The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included in
all copies or substantial portions of the Software.

THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR
IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY,
FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE
AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER
LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM,
OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN
THE SOFTWARE.
